Investing is all about making your savings multiply. Before we dive into all the details of how to do that, here are a few investing basics for beginners:

How much money you need to start investing: Not a lot. In fact, it’s mathematically proven that it’s better to start small than to wait until you have more to deploy — even if you try to play catch-up down the road. That little eye-opener is thanks to a magic formula called compound interest. (We’ll get into how that works in a minute and — yep — we’ve got a calculator for it.)

What to invest in: Stocks are one option. You can also consider investment vehicles that provide exposure to the stock market. The stock market is the place that will deliver the best long-term return on your money.

How to buy stocks: The easiest way to start investing in stocks, and the most common, is to buy a mutual fund — a type of investment that pools money from many investors and invests it in a group of different stocks; call it the “eggs in many baskets” approach.

The secret to making money in stocks: Stay invested. Time (to let your investments ride out the market’s inevitable short-term rough patches) and temperament (the ability to keep cool while others are freaking out) are the keys to investment success. So says a guy you might have heard of named Warren Buffett.

Saving vs. investing
There’s saving (amassing money) and then there’s investing (making it multiply). Two big differences between them: time and the type of account you use as a holding pen for your money.

Saving is what you do with the money you’re going to use to pay for short-term goals — ones in the next five years or so. That money belongs in an account where it’s liquid — that is, easily accessible — and safe, such as a high-yield savings account or even a CD if you’re confident you won’t need the funds until after a certain date.

Investing is what you do with money earmarked for long-term goals such as retirement. With a long time horizon, you can make growth, rather than liquidity, the priority.

What’s wrong with simply playing it safe with all your retirement money and keeping it in cash? Inflation! Dun dun duuunnnn.

Over time, inflation erodes the purchasing power of cash. That effect is especially strong when inflation is high, but it's also true during typical years when inflation is running 2% or 3%. At just 3% inflation, when you go to spend a $100 bill you stashed in a coffee can last year, that money will only get you $97 worth of groceries compared with what it would have gotten you last year. In other words, the cash you’ve been sitting on doesn’t buy as much as it used to, because everything has gotten 3% more expensive. That’s how it’s possible to save money and lose money — that is, spending power — at the same time.

Now imagine the effect of decades of inflation on wads of money.

Should you invest in the stock market?
One look at the historic rate of return of the major asset classes shows that the stock market is going to give you the biggest bang for your bucks. Historically, the stock market's average annual return is 10% before inflation; other asset classes rarely come close to that. 

But many people say they think it’s too risky or they don’t know how to invest money. While this is a valid concern, and investing does carry the risk of loss, having a diverse portfolio can better equip you to weather market ups and downs, and ultimately achieve your goals.

Your dollars could become more valuable
If you start investing now, you can let your savings dollars hitch a ride in a vehicle you can hold on to for years and have it possibly become more valuable than when you started.

It’s like reverse inflation: The hamburger you could buy for $1 when you were a kid would cost you $5 decades later. But you can’t store the $1 burger away for years and sell when it’s worth $5. Instead, you can buy shares in a bunch of companies involved in making that burger — the bun and beef manufacturers, packaging producers, retailers and restaurants (we’ll show you how in a moment) — and reap the rewards of their growth right alongside them.

The benefits of compound interest
What is compound interest? It's like a runaway snowball of money growing larger and larger as it rolls along. All you need to get it going is starter money.

As interest starts to accumulate on your initial investment, it is added to your ball of cash. You continue to earn interest, your balance expands in value and picks up speed — and on and on it goes.

The sooner you get the snowball rolling, the bigger it has the potential to get. Now, let’s go over how to make your pennies multiply.

4 ways to start investing
If you own a mutual fund (in your 401(k), for example) then — congratulations! — you already own stocks. A lot of people don’t realize that.

But that’s just one of the ways investors can get in on the greatest wealth-building machine on the planet. The four most common entry points into the stock market are:

1. Individual stocks
We won’t sugarcoat it: Buying individual stocks requires a fair amount of research, ongoing diligence and a stomach for risk. Those aren’t things that most retirement savers want to deal with. In fact, many 401(k) plans don’t even allow participants to buy individual stocks within the plan. If buying stocks sounds exciting to you, you might consider devoting no more than 10% of your retirement portfolio’s overall value to them to limit risk. 

2. Mutual funds
A mutual fund is a basket that contains a bunch of different investments — often mostly stocks — that all have something in common, be it companies that together make up a market index (see the box for more about the joys of index funds), a particular asset class (bonds, international stocks) or a specific sector (companies in the energy industry, technology stocks). There are even mutual funds that invest solely in companies that adhere to certain ethical or environmental principles (aka socially responsible funds).

What’s nice about mutual funds is that in a single transaction, investors are able to purchase a neatly packaged collection of investments. It’s instant, easy diversification (exposure to lots of different companies) that lets you avoid buying stocks one by one.

3. Index funds
Of all the types of mutual funds investors can purchase, we’re partial to a particular type: index funds.

Why? Because index funds generally charge lower fees, called expense ratios, than traditional mutual funds. And that lower cost is a big-time boost to your overall returns.

An index fund’s sole investment objective is to mirror the performance of a market index, such as the S&P 500 or the Nasdaq Composite.

These funds are made up entirely of the stocks contained in a particular index. (The S&P 500 index contains shares of aboout 500 of the largest publicly traded U.S. companies, while the Nasdaq tracks thousands of stocks traded on a different exchange.) So the returns of these index funds mirror that of the market they track.

The investment objective of actively managed mutual funds, on the other hand, is to “beat the market’s returns” (translation: to outperform a benchmark index). To do that they employ managers to pick and choose the investments in a fund.

The cost of that management, along with expenses for trades, administration, marketing materials, etc., comes out of your investment returns. Largely because of that, the majority of actively managed mutual funds actually underperform their benchmark index.

Index funds are essentially run by robots. (Okay, not literal robots, but computer algorithms programmed to automatically track the market’s comings and goings.) Computer robots don’t demand Wall Street-sized year-end bonuses or need corner offices, which makes them a lot cheaper.

Those savings are passed along to you. In fact, investors pay nearly nine times more in fees for actively managed mutual funds. Choose an index fund, and more of your money stays in your portfolio to grow over time.

4. Exchange-traded funds
Like index funds, ETFs contain a bundle of investments that can range from stocks to bonds to currencies and cash. The beauty of an ETF is that it trades like a stock, which means investors can purchase them for a share price that is often less than the $500-plus minimum investment many mutual funds require.

So which of these should you use to build your retirement portfolio? The answer will be clearer after you learn how to choose investments.

Stocks represent shares of ownership in a company, and are listed for sale on a specific exchange. Exchanges track the supply and demand — and directly related, the price — of each stock. They also bring buyers and sellers together and act as a market for the shares of those companies. The stock market is made up of exchanges, such as the New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq. 

When you go to "invest in the stock market," you're not purchasing a piece of the stock market itself; you're purchasing stocks that are listed on those exchanges that make up the stock market.

Individual traders are typically represented by brokers — these days, that’s often an online broker. You place your stock trades through the broker, which then deals with the exchange on your behalf.

The NYSE and the Nasdaq are open from 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Eastern. If those hours don't work for you, some brokers do offer premarket and after-hours trading sessions.

When you get started, stock trading information can sound like gibberish. But if you’re investing long term — with, say, a 401(k) or IRA geared toward retirement — you can get by just fine without understanding the stock market much at all, as long as you figure out how much you need to invest for retirement.

If, on the other hand, you want to learn how to trade stocks, you do need to understand the stock market, and at least some basic information about how stock trading works.

Understanding the stock market
When people refer to the stock market being up or down, they’re generally referring to one of the major market indexes.

A market index tracks the performance of a group of stocks, which either represents the market as a whole or a specific sector of the market, like technology or retail companies. You’re likely to hear most about the S&P 500, the Nasdaq composite and the Dow Jones Industrial Average; they are often used as proxies for the performance of the overall market. On Jan. 22, 2024, for instance, the S&P 500, Dow Jones and Nasdaq rose to new record highs. 

Investors use indexes to benchmark the performance of their own portfolios and, in some cases, to inform their stock trading decisions. You can also invest in an entire index through an index fund or exchange-traded fund, or ETF, which usually tracks a specific index or sector of the market.

Stock trading information
Most investors would be well-advised to build a diversified portfolio of stocks or stock index funds and hold onto it through good times and bad.

But investors who like a little more action engage in stock trading. Stock trading involves buying and selling stocks frequently in an attempt to time the market.

The goal of stock traders is to capitalize on short-term market events to sell stocks for a profit, or buy stocks at a low. Some stock traders are day traders, which means they buy and sell several times throughout the day. Others are simply active traders, placing a dozen or more trades per month. (Interested in individual stocks? View our list of the best-performing stocks this year.)

Investors who trade stocks do extensive research, often devoting hours a day to following the market. They rely on technical stock analysis, using tools to chart a stock's movements in an attempt to find trading opportunities and trends. Many online brokers offer stock trading information, including analyst reports, stock research and charting tools. (Learn the basics of how to read stock charts.)

Bull markets vs. bear markets
Neither is an animal you’d want to run into on a hike, but the market has picked the bear as the true symbol of fear: A bear market means stock prices are falling — thresholds vary, but generally to the tune of 20% or more — across several of the indexes referenced earlier.

Bull markets are followed by bear markets, and vice versa, with both often signaling the start of larger economic patterns. In other words, a bull market typically means investors are confident, which indicates economic growth. A bear market shows investors are pulling back, indicating the economy may do so as well.

The good news is that the average bull market far outlasts the average bear market, which is why over the long term you can grow your money by investing in stocks.

The S&P 500, which holds about 500 of the largest stocks in the U.S., entered bull market territory in October 2022 following a bear market that started in June of that year. The index saw a massive recovery in 2023 and hit a fresh all-time high in Jan. 2024.

But the index has historically returned an average of about 7% annually, when you factor in reinvested dividends and adjust for inflation. That means if you invested $1,000 30 years ago, you could have about $7,600 today.

Stock market crash vs. correction
A stock market correction happens when the stock market drops by 10% or more. A stock market crash is a sudden, very sharp drop in stock prices, like in early 2020, around the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.

While crashes can herald a bear market, remember what we mentioned above: Most bull markets last longer than bear markets — which means stock markets tend to rise in value over time. In 2020, the market was back to hitting record highs by August.

If you're worried about a crash, it helps to focus on the long term. When the stock market declines, it can be difficult to watch your portfolio’s value shrink in real time and do nothing about it. However, if you’re investing for the long term, doing nothing is often the best course.

Why? Because when you sell investments in a downturn, you lock in your losses. If you plan to re-enter the market at a sunnier time, you’ll almost certainly pay more for the privilege and sacrifice part (if not all) of the gains from the rebound.

The importance of diversification
You can’t avoid bear markets as an investor. What you can avoid is the risk that comes from an undiversified portfolio.

Diversification helps protect your portfolio from inevitable market setbacks. If you throw all of your money into one company, you’re banking on success that can quickly be halted by regulatory issues, poor leadership or an E. coli outbreak.

To smooth out that company-specific risk, investors diversify by pooling multiple types of stocks together, balancing out the inevitable losers and eliminating the risk that one company’s contaminated beef will wipe out your entire portfolio.

But building a diversified portfolio of individual stocks takes a lot of time, patience and research. The alternative is a mutual fund, the aforementioned exchange-traded fund or an index fund. These hold a basket of investments, so you’re automatically diversified. An S&P 500 index fund, for example, would aim to mirror the performance of the S&P 500 by investing in the 500 companies in that index.

The good news is you can combine individual stocks and funds in a single portfolio. One suggestion: Dedicate 10% or less of your portfolio to selecting a few stocks you believe in, and put the rest into index funds.

What is the stock market?
Stocks, which are also called equities, are securities that give shareholders an ownership interest in a public company. It’s a real stake in the business, and if you own a majority of the shares of the business, you control how the business operates. The stock market refers to the collection of stocks that can be bought and sold by the general public on a variety of different exchanges.

Where does stock come from? Public companies issue stock so that they can fund their businesses. Investors who think the business will prosper in the future buy those stock issues. The shareholders get any dividends plus any appreciation in the price of the shares. They can also watch their investment shrink or disappear entirely if the company runs out of money.

The stock market is really a kind of aftermarket, where people who own shares in the company can sell them to investors who want to buy them. This trading takes place on a stock exchange, such as the New York Stock Exchange or the Nasdaq. In years past, traders used to go to a physical location — the exchange’s floor — to trade, but now virtually all trading takes place electronically.

When news people say, “the market was up today,” typically they are referring to the performance of the Standard & Poor’s 500 or the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The S&P 500 is made up of around 500 large publicly traded companies in the U.S, while the Dow includes 30 large companies. These track the performance of the collections of stock and show how they fared on that day of trading and over time.

However, even though people are referring to the Dow and the S&P 500 as “the market,” those are really indexes of stocks. These indexes represent some of the largest companies in the U.S., but they are not the total market, which includes thousands of publicly traded companies.

Of course, you’ll need a brokerage account before you start investing in stocks. As you’re getting started, here are eight more guidelines for investing in the stock market.

1. Buy the right investment
Buying the right stock is so much easier said than done. Anyone can see a stock that’s performed well in the past, but anticipating the performance of a stock in the future is much more difficult. If you want to succeed by investing in individual stocks, you have to be prepared to do a lot of work to analyze a company and manage the investment.

“When you start looking at statistics you’ve got to remember that the professionals are looking at each and every one of those companies with much more rigor than you can probably do as an individual, so it’s a very difficult game for the individual to win over time,” says Dan Keady, CFP, chief financial planning strategist at TIAA.

If you’re analyzing a company, you’ll want to look at a company’s fundamentals – earnings per share (EPS) or a price-earnings ratio (P/E ratio), for example. But you’ll have to do so much more: analyze the company’s management team, evaluate its competitive advantages, study its financials, including its balance sheet and income statement. And these items are just the start.

Keady says going out and buying stock in your favorite product or company isn’t the right way to go about investing. Also, don’t put too much faith in past performance because it’s no guarantee of the future.

You’ll have to study the company and anticipate what’s coming next, a tough job in good times.

2. Avoid individual stocks if you’re a beginner
Everyone has heard someone talk about a big stock win or a great stock pick.

“What they forget about is that often they’re not talking about those particular investments that they also own that did very, very poorly over time,” Keady says. “So sometimes people have an unrealistic expectation about the kind of returns that they can make in the stock market. And sometimes they confuse luck with skill. You can get lucky sometimes picking an individual stock. It’s hard to be lucky over time and avoid those big downturns also.”

Remember, to make money consistently in individual stocks, you need to know something that the forward-looking market isn’t already pricing into the stock price. Keep in mind that for every seller in the market, there’s a buyer for those same shares who’s equally sure they will profit.

“There are tons of smart people doing this for a living, and if you’re a novice, the likelihood of you outperforming that is not very good,” says Tony Madsen, CFP, founder of NewLeaf Financial Guidance in Redwood Falls, Minnesota.

An alternative to individual stocks is an index fund, which can be either a mutual fund or an exchange-traded fund (ETF). These funds hold dozens or even hundreds of stocks. And each share you purchase of a fund owns all the companies included in the index.

Unlike stock, mutual funds and ETFs may have annual fees, though some funds are free.

3. Create a diversified portfolio
One of the key advantages of an index fund is that you immediately have a range of stocks in the fund. For example, if you own a broadly diversified fund based on the S&P 500, you’ll own stocks in hundreds of companies across many different industries. But you could also buy a narrowly diversified fund focused on one or two industries.

Diversification is important because it reduces the risk of any one stock in the portfolio hurting the overall performance very much, and that actually improves your overall returns. In contrast, if you’re buying only one individual stock, you really do have all your eggs in one basket.

The easiest way to create a broad portfolio is by buying an ETF or a mutual fund. The products have diversification built into them, and you don’t have to do any analysis of the companies held in the index fund.

“It may not be the most exciting, but it’s a great way to start,” Keady says. “And again, it gets you out of thinking that you’re gonna be so smart, that you’re going to be able to pick the stocks that are going to go up, won’t go down and know when to get in and out of them.”

When it comes to diversification, that doesn’t just mean many different stocks. It also means investments that are spread among different industries – since stock in similar sectors may move in a similar direction for the same reason.

4. Be prepared for a downturn
The hardest issue for most investors is stomaching a loss in their investments. And because the stock market can fluctuate, you will have losses occur from time to time. You’ll have to steel yourself to handle these losses, or you’ll be apt to buy high and sell low during a panic.

As long as you diversify your portfolio, any single stock that you own shouldn’t have too much of an impact on your overall return. If it does, buying individual stocks might not be the right choice for you. Even index funds will fluctuate, so you can’t get rid of all of your risk, try how you might.

“Anytime the market changes we have this propensity to try to pull back or to second guess our willingness to be in,” says NewLeaf’s Madsen.

That’s why it’s important to prepare yourself for downturns that could come out of nowhere, as one did in 2020. You need to ride out short-term volatility to get attractive long-term returns.

In investing, you need to know that it’s possible to lose money, since stocks don’t have principal guarantees. If you’re looking for a guaranteed return, perhaps a high-yield CD might be better.

The concept of market volatility can be difficult for new and even experienced investors to understand, cautions Keady.

“One of the interesting things is people will see the market’s volatile because the market’s going down,” Keady says. “Of course, when it’s going up it’s also volatile – at least from a statistical standpoint – it’s moving all over the place. So it’s important for people to say that the volatility that they’re seeing on the upside, they’ll also see on the downside.”

5. Try a stock market simulator before investing real money
One way to enter the world of investing without taking risk is to use a stock simulator. Using an online trading account with virtual dollars won’t put your real money at risk. You’ll also be able to determine how you would react if this really were your money that you gained or lost.

“That can be really helpful because it can help people overcome the belief that they’re smarter than the market, that they can always pick the best stocks, always buy and sell in the market at the right time,” Keady says.

Asking yourself why you’re investing can help determine if investing in stocks is for you.

“If their thought is that they’re going to somehow outperform the market, pick all the best stocks, maybe it’s a good idea to try some type of simulator or watch some stocks and see if you could actually do it,” Keady says. “Then if you’re more serious about investing over time, then I think you’re much better off – almost all of us, including myself – to have a diversified portfolio such as provided by mutual funds or exchange traded funds.”

(Bankrate reviewed some of the best investing apps, including a few fun stock simulators.)

6. Stay committed to your long-term portfolio
Keady says investing should be a long-term activity. He also says you should divorce yourself from the daily news cycle.

By skipping the daily financial news, you’ll be able to develop patience, which you’ll need if you want to stay in the investing game for the long term. It’s also useful to minimize how often you look at your portfolio , so that you don’t become too unnerved or too excited. These are great tips for beginners who have yet to manage their emotions when investing.

“Some of the news cycle, at times it becomes 100 percent negative and it can become overwhelming for people,” Keady says.

One strategy for beginners is to set up a calendar and predetermine when you’ll be evaluating your portfolio. Sticking to this guideline will prevent you from selling out of a stock during some volatility – or not getting the full benefit of a well-performing investment, Keady says.


7. Start now
Choosing the perfect opportunity to jump in and invest in the stock market typically doesn’t work well. Nobody knows with 100 percent certainty the best time to get in. And investing is meant to be a long-term activity. There is no perfect time to start.

“One of the core points with investing is not just to think about it, but to get started,” Keady says. “And start now. Because if you invest now, and often over time, that compounding is the thing that can really drive your results. If you want to invest, it’s very important to actually get started and have … an ongoing savings program, so that we can reach our goals over time.”

8. Avoid short-term trading
Understanding whether you’re investing for the long-term future or the short term can also help determine your strategy – and whether you should be investing at all. Sometimes short-term investors can have unrealistic expectations about growing their money. And research shows that most short-term investors, such as day traders, lose money. You’re competing against high-powered investors and well-programmed computers that may better understand the market.

New investors need to be aware that buying and selling stocks frequently can get expensive. It can create taxes and other fees, even if a broker’s headline trading commission is zero.

If you’re investing for the short term, you risk not having your money when you need it.

“When I’m advising clients … anything under a couple of years, even sometimes three years out, I’m hesitant to take too much market risk with those dollars,” Madsen says.

Depending on your financial goals, a savings account, money market account or a short-term CD may be better options. Experts often advise investors that they should invest in the stock market only if they can keep the money invested for at least three to five years. Money that you need for a specific purpose in the next couple years should probably be invested in low-risk investments, such as a high-yield savings account or a high-yield CD.

9. Keep investing over time
It can be easy to dump your money into the market and think you’re done. But those who build real wealth do so over time, by adding money to their investments. That means having a strong saving discipline – holding back some of your paycheck – so that you can put it to work in the stock market. You’ll be able to put more money to work and grow your wealth even faster.

You may already be doing this if you have a 401(k) retirement account, which takes money from your biweekly pay and puts it into the investments you’ve selected. Even if you don’t have a 401(k), many brokerage accounts allow you to set up automatic transfers to your account. Then you may be able to set up automatic investments at a broker or one of the best robo-advisors.

You can automate the process of investing, helping to keep your emotions out of the process.

How the stock market works for beginners
The stock market is really a way for investors or brokers to exchange stocks for money, or vice versa. Anyone who wants to buy stock can go there and buy whatever is on offer from those who own the stock. Buyers are expecting their stocks to rise, while sellers may be expecting their stocks to fall or at least not rise much more.

So the stock market allows investors to wager on the future of a company. Together, investors set the value of the company by what price they’re willing to buy and sell at.

While stock prices in the market on any day may fluctuate according to how many shares are demanded or supplied, over time the market evaluates a company on its business results and future prospects. A business growing sales and profits will likely see its stock rise, while a shrinking business will probably see its stock fall, at least over time. In the short term, however, the performance of a stock has a lot to do with just the supply and demand in the market.

When private firms see which stocks investors favor, they may decide to fund their business by selling stock and raising cash. They’ll conduct an initial public offering, or IPO, using an investment bank, which sells shares to investors. Then investors can sell their stock later in the stock market if they want to or they can buy even more at any time the stock is publicly traded.

The key point is this: investors price stocks according to their expectations of how the company’s business will perform in the future. So the market is forward-looking, with some experts saying the market anticipates events about six to nine months away.

Risks and benefits of investing in stocks
The stock market allows individual investors to own stakes in some of the world’s best companies, and that can be tremendously lucrative. In aggregate, stocks are a good long-term investment as long as they’re purchased at reasonable prices. For example, over time the S&P 500 has generated about a 10 percent annual return, including a nice cash dividend, too.

Investing in stocks also offers another nice tax advantage for long-term investors. As long as you don’t sell your stock, you won’t owe any tax on the gains. Only money that you receive, such as dividends, will be taxable. So you can hold your stock forever and never have to pay taxes on your gains.

However, if you do realize a gain by selling the stock, you’ll owe capital gains taxes on it. How long you hold the stock will determine how it’s taxed. If you buy and sell the asset within a year, it will fall under short-term capital gains and will be taxed at your regular income tax rate. If you sell after you’ve held the asset a year, then you’ll pay the long-term capital gains rate, which is usually lower. If you record a loss, you can write that off your taxes or against your gains.

While the market as a whole has performed well, many stocks in the market don’t perform well and may even go bankrupt. These stocks are eventually worth zero, and they’re a total loss. On the other hand, some stocks such as Amazon and Apple have continued to soar for years, earning investors hundreds of times their initial investment.

So investors have two big ways to win in the stock market:

Buy a stock fund based on an index, such as the S&P 500, and hold it to capture the index’s long-term return. However, its return can vary markedly, from down 30 percent in one year to up 30 percent in another. By buying an index fund, you’ll get the weighted average performance of the stocks in the index.
Buy individual stocks and try to find the stocks that will outperform the average. However, this approach takes a lot of skill and knowledge, and it’s more risky than simply buying an index fund. However, if you can find an Apple or Amazon on the way up, your returns are likely going to be much higher than in an index fund.
Bottom line
Investing in the stock market can be very rewarding, especially if you avoid some of the pitfalls that most new investors experience when starting out. Beginners should find an investing plan that works for them and stick to it through the good times and bad.

